# U.S.-Education-Descriptive-and-Predictive-Analysis
Advanced Data Analysis

Executive Summary

The standard of education in the United States of America is characterized by its quality and diversity. This includes aspects like socioeconomic backgrounds, number of students enrolled, size of classes, and different types of financial resources provided to schools by government. These aspects were generated using different educational bodies like board of education, which is a collection of members elected by local elections. These bodies’ primary responsibility is to check the academic quality of different schools as well as provide funding reports and resources.

The main purpose of this report is to document multivariate statistical techniques that present findings and extract variances important to our study objectives. This research uses these techniques in order to explore meaningful patterns in the data. This educational data set was utilized to study different features of students’ achievements in relevance to other aspects. This data was aggregated from all public schools across the US in the years from 1992 to 2017. 

The US Educational Dataset is a multivariate data frame sourced from Kaggle. The data was originally sourced from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and the U.S. Census Bureau. The data set is designed to bring different aspects of the US education and see how they interact together. It had 25 variables and a total of 1492 observations from different states. The data is broken down into three different variable types which are Enrollments, Financials and Student Achievements in each state every year.

Different statistical techniques like Multiple Regression Analysis, and Principle Components Analysis were applied in order to study the academic achievements for fourth and eighth grade students. These techniques produce different models and check for similar patterns between different aspects in order to provide insights for different educational organizations and institutions. Principal Component Analysis is a statistical technique used for feature extraction. It’s used to emphasize variation and bring out strong patterns in a dataset. 

This study finds that factors like State revenue, Federal revenue and Total number of students enrolled in grade 1-8 played an important role in predicting the average math score for 8th grade students, whereas Federal revenue, Local revenue, Total number of students enrolled in Pre-Kindergarten, and Total number of students enrolled in 4th grade were able to predict the average score for the 4th grade students in each state.

In future, different variables could be added to the database using more information about students and their families. Different social and demographic variables could help disclose more patterns and interesting communalities between students and these variables. These aspects could help schools and educational institutions improve their systems and quality of education.

In conclusion, education is a very important element in our society. Knowledge Discovery Process can play a crucial role which allows many Data Mining techniques to extract knowledge from row data and obtain wisdom. In this paper, we found that different scores for different grades vary together. In addition, all financial and school enrollments aspects connect in accordance to certain patterns and they shaped as one component.

Abstract

Higher education standards for the 21st century continues to promote discoveries in the field through learning analytics (LA). The purpose of this study was to examine American students’ Math and Reading scores in relevance to number of students and financial expenditures to identify groups exhibiting common patterns of responses. This study investigated the scores of American students through the adoption of students’ enrollments in different grades. The scores of students were examined through Linear Regression, Principle Component Analysis, and Logistic Regression. PCA have identified two components and the results indicated that variables in each component are highly correlated. All students’ enrollments that include number of students in different grades in addition to financial features belonged to component 1. Students’ performance and academic achievements belonged to component 2. The first component has explained 75.5 percent component variability.  

Linear regression on the other hand have identified the important variables that could import a good fit in a model. Math scores were used to generate the linear model using other values as predictors. After discarding insignificant variables using different statistical tests that weighs the strength of the evidences, two models were generated. First model consists of 4 predictors (FEDERAL_REVENUE, GRADES_PK_G, LOCAL_REVENUE, GRADES_4_G) and the second model consists of 3 predictors (FEDERAL_REVENUE, STATE_REVENUE, GRADES_1_8_G). 

This research may provide practical implications by proposing effective ways to better understand and target students’ math and reading scores. Research results may also provide direction for developing successful strategies in improving students’ scores. 

Introduction

The US Educational Institutions have seen different variations in students’ performance due to a number of factors including students’ Enrollment, States’ revenues, and Expenditures. The study has administered American students at public schools in all American states for 25 years (1993-2017). Data is sourced from the U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). The 'ENROLL' feature represents the U.S. Census Bureau data value (financial data), while the column 'GRADES_ALL' represents the NCES data value (demographic data). Though the two organizations correspond on this matter, these values (which are ostensibly the same) do vary. This dataset consists of 25 variables and 1492 observations. Since identification columns (PRIMARY_KEY, STATE, YEAR) are categorical, they would be removed to perform statistical analysis. NAEP test score data is only available for certain years. Thus, missing values had to be treated for analytical purposes as well. Also, a repeated row was deleted in addition to some rows with zero values. Dimensions of this dataset were dropped to 403 observations and 22 numeric variables.

Principal Component Analysis was applied to educational data to explore the factors thought to be very important in improving the students’ performance. PCA was performed in R-mode using correlation and covariance for educational data. PCA chooses a set of variables that are highly correlated with each other to create a subset out of them. PCA chooses these variables to also be quite uncorrelated with other subset of variables which are combined together to form a factor. 

Methodology:

Principal Component Analysis (PCA):

principal component analysis technique was implemented in R using correlation and covariance for educational data. Principal component analysis is based on the linear equation as follows:

Yij = βi₁X1j + βi₂X2j + βi₃X3j + … + βipXpj where i, j = 1, 2, … p.

First, correlation matrix was used to identify correlations between different variables. In the correlation matrix, the sizes of some correlation place constraints on the sizes of others. To illustrate, high bi-variate correlation matrix provides components. Second, it’s important to look at frameworks of individual correlations where match acute relationships are balanced due to correlation between two variables. Third, under certain conditions, matrices can be diagonalized. The diagonalization of a matrix gives a matrix with positive numbers on the main diagonal and all non-diagonal elements become zeros. These positive elements represent the variances from the correlation matrix. This can be written as follows: L =V’ RV. 

The columns of matrix V are called eigenvectors, while the elements on the main diagonal of L matrix are eigenvalues. Each eigenvector corresponds to each eigenvalue. Factor Analysis keep only components with correlated variables by keeping the ones that have large corresponding eigenvalues which are normally the ones with eigenvalue greater than 1. Finally, when these correlation matrices are diagonalized, the information is repackaged.  The resulting correlation matrix is determined using the product of the matrices of eigenvectors and the square root of the eigenvalues as follows: R = (V L) (LV’). This equation in brief represent the product of factor loading matrix and its transpose. 

The communality for a variable is the sum of squared loading (SSL) across components which is the proportion of variance accounted for by the components. It can be calculated by dividing the sum of square loadings (SSL) with the number of variables. Furthermore, the covariance proportion for a component is obtained by dividing the sum of square loadings (SSL) for this component with the sum of communalities.

Multiple Regression Analysis: 

Multiple Regression analysis technique on the educational dataset was conducted using R as well. The main purpose of this technique was to learn more about the relationships between different independent (Predictor) variables and the dependent (Response) variable. The main objective goal of multiple regression is to fit a straight line to a number of points so that the squared standard deviations of the observed values from that line are minimized. Hence, it’s also sometimes known as the least square’s estimation method. The line is basically a two-dimensional space that is define by the equation Y= a + b*X. Here, Y is the dependent variable which can be expressed in terms of the constant (a) and a slope (b) times the X as the dependent variable. In case of multivariate analysis, there exists to be more than one predicting or X variables therefore the line could not be visualized in 2d space but can be computed in the exact manner. Generally, the multiple regression will estimate a linear equation of the form: 

Y = a + b1*X1 + b2*X2 + ... + bp*Xp.  

The multiple regression analysis represents the independent contributions of each predicting variable to the prediction of response variables. Another way to represent it is if a dependent variable Y is correlated to independent variable X, the amount of change in Y could be interpreted by each individual independent variable X by having other variables constant. R squared which is also known as the coefficient of determination is generally used to evaluate the fitness of a model. R squared is equal to 1 minus the ratio of residual variability. The Coefficient of determination measures the proportion of variance in the independent variables explained by the dependent variable. 

In statistical analysis the correlation coefficient R measures the degree to which two or more independent (X) variables are related to the dependent (Y). While performing multiple regression analysis, different assumptions must be held, multiple collinearity is one of them. The issue of multiple collinearity arises when there is a significant relationship between independent variables. These independent variables are considered correlated and cause problems when fitting the model and interpreting the results. Multicollinearity can be diagnosed by using scatter plots or correlation coefficient matrix between X-variables. Correlation coefficients that are 0.7 or higher considered as strong multicollinearity. Also, multicollinearity can be detected using the variance inflation factor VIF. If VIF is bigger than 10, that means the multicollinearity is problematic.

Conclusion:

The principal Component Analysis was used to explore the effects of different enrollment and financial variables which are insignificantly affecting the students’ math and reading scores for 4th and 8th grades. In the case of finding financial variables are highly correlated with each other and with enrollment variables as well.  This explains that the more student enrollments there are, the more the population is and the higher the financial income and expenditures are. To know the variability between the components, it was found that first two components account for exactly 88.6% of the total variability. These two components adequately describe the whole correlation matrix. 

The multiple regression analysis was able to identify different predicting variables that could cause noticeable impacts yet small on the average math scores for students in different states. The financial status and the numbers of students’ enrollments in each state played a vital role in determining the students’ academic performance. 

Finally, it was obvious to see that states’ financials, expenditures, and students’ enrollments had high loadings in component 1. In component 2, it was found that math and reading results had the high scores. The important finding of this study is that the scores vary together for different grades in different states and different years. On the other hand, all financials, number of enrollments as well vary together in different states and different years.
